星期六   第十八週
Saturday   Week Eighteen

看看外面的天空，儘管放鬆你的思維，讓思維和天空融合。注意漂浮在空中的雲朵，這不需花費任何的氣力。你此刻對於雲朵無聲漂浮的察覺，是非常單純、容易、毫不費力而即興的。你只需意識到雲朵的存在就好，那是一種力的，對待樹、鳥和對面石頭也是一樣。你只需單純、不費力地見證他們。

現在，看看你自己身體的感官。你可以察覺到此刻身體各部分所有的感覺——也許是坐著的壓力，也許是胃裡的溫暖，也許是頸部的緊繃。即使這些感覺是緊繃、緊縮的，也可以依然容易地意識到它們。這些感覺在你此刻的察覺中出現；這察覺非常單純、容易、毫不費力而即興的。你只需單純、不費力地見證他們。

看看在你意識中出現的念頭。你可能會注意到各種影像、象徵、概念、欲望、希望，以及思惟。這些都即刻浮現於你的意識中，然後經過去。這些想法和感覺在你此刻的察覺中出現，而這種察覺是非常單純、容易、不費力而即興的。你只需單純、不費力地見證他們。

所以請注意：你可以看到白雲飄浮，因為你不是那些雲——你是雲的見證者。

你可以感受到身體各部的感覺，因為你不是那些感覺——你是感覺的見證者。
你可以看到思想浮現，因為你不是那些思想——你是思想的見證者。萬事萬物皆於毫不費力地察覺中即興而且自然的出現。

那麼你是誰呢？你不是外面的物體，你不是感覺，你不是思想——你是輕鬆力地察覺所有這些的意識。所以你不是那些東西。那麼你是誰呢？你是什麼呢？

對你自己這麼說：我有感覺，但我不是那些感覺。我是誰？我有思想，但我不是那些思想。我是誰？我有慾望，但我不是那些慾望。我是誰？

所以反推回自我醒覺的源頭，返回見證，並停留在這個見證中：我不是物體、不是感覺、不是慾望、不是思想。

但人們經常犯一個很大的錯誤。他們認為如果持續在見證中，他們會看到或感覺到某些與眾不同的事物。但你不會看到任何事物，如果你看到什麼，那只是另一樣物體、另一個感覺、另一個思想、另一個感官、另一個形變，但那些都是物體，是你所不是的東西。

不，當你持續在見證中——知道我不是物體，我不是感覺，我不是思想——所有你將注意到的，是自由的感覺、解放的感覺、釋放的感覺——從用那些微小有限事物來界定自己的可怕束縛中解放出來，包括你微小的身體，微小的思維、微小的自我，這些都是可被看見的物體，皆非真正的觀者看，真正的我、純粹的見證者，真正的你。

所以你不會看到任何特別的事物，無論出現什麼都是好的。雲飄浮在天空，感覺浮動於身體，思想浮現於思維——而你可以毫不費力地見證一切。它們全都自然地出現於你此刻、容易、不費力的察覺中。而這見證一切的察覺本身並非可見的特定東西，它只是一個巨大的，像背景一樣的自由感覺，或是純粹的空——你就在這純粹的空中，而整個世界就呈現在其中。你就是那自由、開放、空——而不是在其中出現的任何點點滴滴的東西。

持續在空、自由、輕鬆、不費力的見證中，注意到答案在你察覺的廣大空間中出現。雲朵在你裡面浮現——就是這樣，你可以品嚐它，可以和它融為一體。它就好像緊貼在你皮膚旁一般，如此的接近。天空和你的察覺合而為一，透過你的察覺，天空中所有的事物皆不費力地漂浮著。你可以親吻太陽，吞噬山岳，它們是那麼的接近。禪說：「只要一口就可以吞噬太平洋」，那將是世界上最容易的事。也就是當內與外不再二分，主與客不再有別。觀與被觀成為一體的時侯……

——Ken Wilber
    肯恩威爾伯

——Zenrinkushu
禪林句集

Look out there at the sky, and just relax your mind, let your mind and the sky mingle. Notice the clouds floating by in the sky. Notice that this takes no effort on your part. Your present awareness, in which these clouds are floating, is very simple, very easy, effortless, spontaneous. You simply notice that there is an effortless awareness of the clouds. The same is true of those trees, and those birds and those rocks. You simply and effortlessly witness them.

Look now at the sensations in your own body. You can be aware of whatever bodily feelings are present—perhaps pressure where you are sitting, perhaps warmth in your tummy, maybe tightness in your neck. But even if these feelings are tight and tense, you can easily be aware of them. These feelings arise in your present awareness, and that awareness is very simple, easy, effortless, spontaneous. You simply and effortlessly witness them.

Look at the thoughts arising in your mind. You might notice various images, symbols, concepts, desires, hopes, and fears, all spontaneously arising in your awareness. They arise, stay a bit, and pass. These thoughts and feelings arise in your present awareness, and that awareness is very simple, effortless, spontaneous. You simply and effortlessly witness them.

So notice: you can see the clouds float by, because you are not those clouds—you are the witness of those clouds. You can feel bodily feelings, because you are not those feelings—you are the witness of those feelings. You can see thoughts float by, because you are not those thoughts—you are the witness of those thoughts. Spontaneously and naturally, these things all arise, on their own, in your present effortless awareness.

So who are you? You are not objects out there, you are not feelings, you are not thoughts—you are effortlessly aware of all those, so you are not those. Who or what are you?

Say it this way to yourself: I have feelings, but I am not those feelings.

Who am I? I have thoughts, but I am not those thoughts. Who am I? I have desires, but I am not those desires. Who am I?

So you push back into the source of your own awareness. You push back into the Witness, and you rest in the Witness. I am not objects, not feelings, not desires, not thoughts.

But the people usually make a big mistake. They think that if they rest in the Witness, they are going to see something, or feel something, something really neat and special. But you won’t see anything. If you see something, that is just another object—another feeling, another thought, another sensation, another image. But those are all objects; those are what you are not.

No, as you rest in the Witness—realizing, I am not objects, I am not feelings, I am not thoughts—all you will notice is a sense of freedom, a sense of liberation, a sense of release—release from the terrible constriction of identifying with these puny little finite objects, your little body and little mind and little ego, all of which are objects that can be seen, and thus are not the true Seer, the real Self, the pure Witness, which is what you really are.

So you won’t see anything in particular. Whatever is arising is fine. Clouds float by in the sky, feelings float by in the body, thoughts float by in the mind—and you can effortlessly witness all of them. They all spontaneously arise in your own present, easy, effortless, awareness. And this witnessing awareness is not itself anything specific you can see. It is just a vast, background sense of freedom—or pure emptiness—and in that pure emptiness, which you are, the entire manifest world arises. You are that freedom, openness, emptiness—and not any itty bitty thing that arises in it.

Resting in that empty, free, easy, effortless witnessing, notice that the clouds are arising in the vast space of your awareness. The clouds are arising within you—so much so, you can taste the clouds, you are one with the clouds, it is as if they are on this side of your skin, they are so close. The sky and your awareness have become one, and all things in the sky are floating effortlessly through your own awareness. You can kiss the sun, swallow the mountain, they are that close. Zen says, "Swallow the Pacific Ocean in a single gulp," and that's the easiest thing in the world, when inside and outside are no longer two, when subject and object are non-dual, when the looker and the looked are at One,....

—Ken Wilber