星期四                                                     第九週
Thursday                                                 Week Nine

庖丁為文惠君解牛,手之所觸,肩之所倚,足之所履,膝之所踦,砉然嚮然,
奏刀騞然,莫不中音。合於桑林之舞,乃中經首之會。
文惠君曰:「嘻,善哉!技蓋至此乎?」
庖丁釋刀對曰:「臣之所好者道也,進乎技矣。始臣之解牛之時,
所見無非牛者。三年之後,未嘗見全牛也。方今之時,臣以神遇而不以目視,
官知止而神欲行。依乎天理,批大郤,導大窾,因其固然。
技經肯綮之未嘗,而況大軱乎!良庖歲更刀,割也;族庖月更刀,折也。
今臣之刀十九年矣,所解數千牛矣,而刀刃若新發於硎。
彼節者有間,而刀刃者無厚;以無厚入有間,恢恢乎其於遊刃必有餘地矣,
是以十九年而刀刃若新發於硎。雖然,每至於族,吾見其難為,
怵然為戒,視為止,行為遲。動刀甚微,謋然已解,如土委地。
提刀而立,為之四顧,為之躊躇滿志,善刀而藏之。」
文惠君曰:「善哉!吾聞庖丁之言,得養生焉。」

——Chuang Tzu

Lord Wen-hui's cook was cutting up an ox, Out went a hand, down went a shoulder,
He planted a foot, he pressed with a knee, The ox fell apart with a whisper.
The gleaming knife murmured like a gentle wind. All in perfect rhythm, as though he was dancing
The sacred dance of the Mulberry Grove, As though he were singing the ancient
Melody of the Ching-shou.
Lord Wen-hui exclaimed, "Wonderful! Your skill has reached such heights!"
The cook laid down his knife and replied, "What I care about is the Way,
Which goes beyond skill. When I first began cutting up oxen,
All I could see was the ox itself. After three years I no longer saw the whole ox.
And now—now I go at it by spirit and don't look with my eyes.
Perception and understanding have come to a stop and spirit moves where it wants.
I go along with the natural makeup, Strike in the big hollows,
Guide the knife through the big openings, And follow things as they are.
So I never touch the smallest ligament or tendon, much less a main joint.
A good cook needs a new chopping block every year—he cuts.
A mediocre cook needs a new knife every month—he hacks.
I've had this knife of mine for nineteen years and I've cut up thousands of oxen with it,
and yet the blade is as good as though it had just come from the grindstone.
There are spaces between the joints, and the blade of the knife has really no thickness.
If you insert what has no thickness into such spaces, then there's plenty of room—
more than enough for the blade to play about it. That's why after nineteen years
the blade of my knife is still as good as when it first came from the grindstone.
However, whenever I come to a complicated place, I size up the difficulties,
tell myself to watch out and be careful, keep my eyes on what I'm doing,
work very slowly, and move the knife with the greatest subtlety,
until—flop! the whole thing comes apart like a clod of earth crumbling to the ground.
I stand there holding the knife and look all around me, completely satisfied and reluctant to move on,
and then I wipe off the knife and put it away."
"Excellent!" said Lord Wen-hui. "I have heard the words of Cook Ting and learned how to care for life!"

——Chuang Tzu
