星期四                                                        第八週
Thursday                                                  Week Eight

身為一個網球教練，當我密切看待打球時我腦袋會不停地註解和評說——在一個誰是「我在對什麼？」但當我去發現，我發現至少有兩個「我」在我腦中；一個在打球的「我」，與另一個在講話的「我」。我注意到在講話的那個「我」喜歡主導、告訴打球的「我」該怎麼做；甚至不信任的程度，會試著強迫「我2」去服從口頭指令。我也注意到當我越相信「我2」的能力時，「我1」的指令會顯著下降；相反地，當我教學生時，我不再餵「我1」很多技術資訊，而是相信「我2」的學習能力，學生們的進步變成一般人的三到四倍，挫折感也少很多。
總而言之，我發現「我1」——那個愛說話、製造想法的心智——其實是控制身體肌肉的糟糕上司；當「我2」——身體本身——得以被允許去控制時，表現的品質、享受程度以及學習的速度都得到了提升。

——Tim Galway

A major breakthrough in my understanding of the problem of control of mind and body came when, as a tennis instructor, I became aware of a constant commentary going on inside my head as I played.... “Come on, get your back earlier,... You hit that one too late again.... Bend your knees on those volleys.... Oh-oh, here comes another backhand like the one you missed last time.... Make sure you don’t miss it again.... Damn it! you missed it again.... When are you ever going to hit those things?.... Watch the ball, watch the ball....What am I going to say to my doubles partner if I lose this match?”
As I began to take a closer look at the thoughts going through my mind during a tennis match, I found myself asking, “Whom am I talking to, and who is doing the talking?” I was surprised to discover that there seemed to be at least two identities within me. One was playing tennis; the other was telling him how. I observed that the one doing the talking, whom I named Self 1, thought he knew all about how to play and was supervising Self 2, the one who had to hit the ball. In fact, Self 1 not only gave Self 2 instructions but criticized him for past errors, warned him of probable future ones, and harangued him whenever he made a mistake.
It was easy to see that the primary feeling in the relationship between these two selves was mistrust. Self 1 didn’t trust Self 2 to hit the ball, and precisely to the extent that he lacked trust, he would try to force Self 2 to conform to his verbal instructions. I noticed that when I had more confidence in my ability to hit a shot, there was a corresponding decrease in instructions from Self 1, and that Self 2 would perform amazingly well without him. When I was on a streak, there was no talk in my head at all.
Once I became aware of Self 1, it became increasingly obvious that my role as teacher wasn’t helpful. When I gave a student a lot of technical information, then progress was slower and with more frustration. But when I trusted the capacity of the student’s Self 2 to learn, progress was faster and with less frustration.
In short, I found that Self 1—the verbalizing, thought-producing self—is a lousy boss when it comes to control of the body’s muscles system. When Self 2—the body itself—is allowed control, the quality of performance, the level of enjoyment, and the rate of learning are all improved.

——Tim Galway